Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
185 
  
 
 
  
 
  
Chapter 3 
 
Karma Yoga 
The Yoga of action 
 
Arjuna said: 1. If it be thought  by you that 'knowledge' is 
superior to 'action, ' O Janardana, why then, do you, O Kashava, engage me in this terrible action?  
Arjuna still believes that, to fight against his cousins, 
teachers and grandfathers is a terrible ( ghora ) action. He 
seems to have forgotten, or not to have understood at all, 
Krishna's words in the last chapter. Kashava  had therein 
explained and clearly indicated that the Mahabharata-war 
was not Arjuna's attempt to murder any of his cousins or 
teachers. Arjuna cannot have any individual personality 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
186 
 in any army. It was a war. In a war the two armies fight, 
and it represents the clas h of two ideologies. The 
Pandavas were convinced of the moral purity, the 
spiritual worth, and the divine glory of their standpoint in 
the imminent test of strength. But unfortunately, Arjuna 
could not sink his egoism, and see himself totally 
identified with the army, championing the cause of the 
good. To the degree he could no t identify himself with the 
cause, to that extent he nourished a self-centered egoistic 
vanity, and, therefore, his moral puritanism in fighting the 
war.  
Arjuna means to say that Krishna's arguments were 
supporting the 'Path-of-Renuncia tion,' they included an 
advice to Arjuna to undertake the great and terrible 'Path-
of-Action.'  
MOREOVER:  
2. With this apparently perplexing speech you confuse, as it 
were, my understanding; therefore, tell me that "one" way by which, I, for certain, may attain the Highest.  
Suffering from his own delusions as he was, Arjuna, 
intellectually an average man, had not in himself that 
amount of subtle philosophic al acumen to discriminate 
between the subtle argumen ts, and grasp for himself 
whether the 'Path-of-Action' or the 'Way-of-Knowledge' 
was the direct approach to the Infinite, the Eternal. His 
question concludes, therefore, with a humble request: 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
187 
 "Tell me that 'ONE' PATH by which, I, for certain, can 
attain the Highest."  
As a child of that age, th ere was no doubt, even in 
Arjuna's mind, that life was no t to be squandered away in 
merely producing, acquiring, hoarding and spending 
wealth. As a true child of Hinduism, he vaguely knew that he had to fulfil a great cultu ral mission in the world, and 
that material successes were only the means and not the 
end, or the goal. Partha's doubt was only on how best he 
could make use of the envi ronments that presented 
themselves to him so that he might carve out for himself a 
greater cultural growth and a fuller spiritual unfoldment 
in himself.  
THE BLESSED LORD GIVES THE FOLLOWING REPLY 
WHICH IS IN CONFORMITY WITH THE QUESTION:  
The Blessed Lord said : 3. In this  world there is a two-fold path, 
as I said before, O sinless one;  the 'Path-of-Knowledge' of the 
SANKHYANS and the 'Path-of-Action' of the YOGINS.  
To consider the 'Path-of-Action' ( Karma  Yoga ) and the 
'Path-of-Knowledge' ( Jnana  Yoga ) as competitive is to 
understand neither of them . They, being complementary, 
are to be practised SERIALLY one after the other. Selfless 
activity gives a chance to the mind to exhaust many of its 
existing mental impressions. Thus purified, the mind 
gains such a flight and ethereal  poise that it can steadily 
soar into the subtlest realms of meditation, and finally 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
188 
 come to gain the experien ce of the transcendental 
Absolute.  
Men belonging to foreign cultures find it very difficult to 
understand Hinduism when they approach it with all 
their native enthusiasm. They feel overwhelmed when 
they read of such a variety of 'Paths' and seemingly contradictory advices. But, to condemn Hinduism as 
unscientific because of this , would be a mistake, as 
colossal and as ludicrous as to  say that medicine is no 
science at all, since, for ea ch patient, the same doctor 
prescribes a different medicine , during a single afternoon!!  
Religious men, men fit for spiritual discipline, fall under 
two distinct categories: the active and the contemplative. 
Temperamentally, these two cl asses fall so widely apart, 
that to prescribe for both of them one and the same 
technique for individual development, would be to 
discourage one section and igno re its progress. The Geeta 
is not merely a text-book of Hinduism but a Bible of 
humanity. As such, in its univ ersal application, it has to 
show methods of self-developme nt to suit the mental and 
intellectual temperaments of both these categories.  
Therefore, Krishna clearly explains here that the two-fold 
path of Self-development was prescribed for the world-the 
'Path-of-Knowledge' to the MEDITATIVE, and the 'Path-
of-Action' to the ACTIVE. It is added that this 
classification and careful prescription for the two different 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
189 
 types of men has been in existence from the very 
beginning of creation.  
For the first time, Lord Krishna is giving us here in this 
stanza, a glimpse of the identity of the man who is the 
author of the Geeta. If it were given out by the son of 
Devaki, a mere mortal who lived in that age, he would at best, have given us only an  intellectual theory built 
entirely upon the observed data. Observed data always 
have a knack of changing, and when they change, the final 
conclusions also must necessarily change. We have now a 
hundred different political and economic philosophies, 
and numberless scientific theori es that have all become 
outmoded when the social living conditions, or the 
economic structure, or the collected and observed data 
have changed in their set up, or in their imperative 
messages. If the Geeta was the conclusion of a mere 
mortal Krishna's intellect, the values of life preached 
therein would also have got outmoded and by now 
become fossilised!  
Here, He clearly says that, at the very beginning of 
creation, these two 'Paths' were prescribed by 'Me'; 
thereby indicating that Krishna  is talking here not as the 
Blue Boy of Vrindavana --- not as the Beloved of the gopis  -
-- not as the great diplomat of  His age --- but as a Man-of-
Realisation, a Prophet, and a Seer, who lived in that 
period of Indian history. It is neither as Arjuna's 
charioteer, nor as a friend, nor as a well-wisher of the 
Pandavas, that He is talking at this moment. Perfectly 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
190 
 identifying with the spirit ual dignity in Himself, 
experiencing His Absolute Na ture, it is as the Eternal 
substratum for the entire PLURALISTIC world, as the 
Cause of all Creation, as the Might in all substances, that 
He is talking now. Transcending all time and causation, in 
a burning conviction of the liv ed Truth, He declares here: 
"At the very beginning of creation, these two 'paths' were 
given out by Me as the two possible methods by which the 
ACTIVE and the CONTEMPLATIVE could seek and re-
discover the Eternal nature of their very Self."  
THE 'PATH-OF-ACTION' IS A MEANS TO AN END, 
NOT DIRECTLY, BUT ONLY AS A PREPARATION TO 
THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE'; WHEREAS THE LATER, 
WHICH IS ATTAINED BY MEANS OF THE 'PATH-OF-
ACTION,' LEADS TO THE GO AL DIRECTLY WITHOUT 
EXTRANEOUS HELP. TO SHOW THIS THE LORD 
SAYS:  
4. Not by non-performance of  actions does man reach 
'actionlessness' ; nor by mere renunciation does he attain 'Perfection. '  
Spiritually, as the Self, ever yone of us is All-full and 
Perfect. Due to our 'ignorance'o f this spiritual experience, 
we entertain in our intellect unending desires, each of 
them being our own intellect's a ttempt to fulfil itself! It is 
very well-known that we desire things that are not already 
with us in full, or in a satisfying quantity. As the desires in 
us, so are our thoughts; thoughts are the disturbances 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
191 
 created in our mental zone by our desires. At every 
moment, the texture and quality of our thoughts are 
directly conditioned and controlled by our desires. 
Thoughts in an individual, expressed in the outer world-
of-objects, become his action s; actions are nothing other 
than the actor's thoughts projected and expressed in the 
world. Thus, in this chain-o f-'ignorance,' constituted of 
desires, thoughts, and actions,  each one of us is caught 
and bound.  
If we observe them a little more closely, we find that these 
are not so many different factor s, but are, in fact, different 
expressions of one and the same spiritual IGNORANCE. 
This ignorance ( Avidya ), when it functions in the intellect, 
expresses itself as DESIRES. When the desires, which are 
nothing other than the 'ignoran ce,' function in the mental 
zone, they express themse lves as THOUGHTS. These 
thoughts, when they express in the outer world, become 
ACTIONS. Naturally, therefore, if the Supreme can be 
defined as "the experience beyond ignorance," it must necessarily be true that the Self is "the State of 
"DESIRELESS-NESS" or "the Condition of 
THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or "the Life of ACTIONLESS-
NESS."  
By mere 'renunciation of action' ( Samnyasa ) no one attains 
Perfection. Running away from life is not the way to reach 
the highest goal of evolution. Arjuna's intention, you may 
remember, was to run away from the war-front, and, 
therefore, this misguided Hind u was to be re-educated in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
192 
 the right understanding of th e immortal culture of the 
Vedas . For this purpose was the Divine Song given out by 
Krishna.  
Through action, to a purificati on of the inner instrument, 
applying which the seeker wa lks the 'Path-of-Knowledge' 
to reach ultimately the spiritual destination of self-development as indicated in th is stanza. Hence it has been 
often quoted by all great writers on Hinduism.  
FOR WHAT REASON, THEN, DOES A PERSON NOT 
ATTAIN PERFECTION THAT IS FREE FROM 
ACTIVITIES BY MERE RENUNCIATION, UNACCOMPANIED BY KNOWLEDGE? --- THE 
REASON THUS ASKED FOR IS GIVEN AS FOLLOWS:  
5. Verily, none can ever remain, even for a moment, without 
performing action; for, everyon e is made to act helplessly, 
indeed, by the qualities born of PRAKRITI.  
Man is ever agitated under the influence of the triple 
tendencies of Unactivity ( Sattwa ), Activity ( Rajas ) and 
Inactivity ( Tamas ) inherent in him. Even for a single 
moment he cannot remain totally inactive. Total inactivity 
is the character of utterly in sentient matter. Even if we are 
physically at rest, mentally and intellectually we are active 
all the time, except during the state of deep-sleep. So long 
as we are under the influence of these three mental 
tendencies ( gunas ), we are helplessly prompted to labour 
and to act.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
193 
 Therefore, not to act at all is to disobey the laws of nature 
which shall, as we all know, bring about a cultural 
deterioration in ourselves. If there is a creature who 
remains inactive physically, he will get dissipated in his 
thoughts. Therefore, the Geeta advises him to act 
vigorously with a right attitude of mind, so that he may 
avoid all internal waste of energy and learn to grow in 
himself.  
NOW, FOR HIM WHO KNOWS NOT THE SELF, IT IS 
NOT RIGHT TO NEGLECT THE DUTY ENJOINED ON 
HIM. SO THE LORD SAYS:  
6. He who, restraining the organs-o f-action, sits thinking in his 
mind of the sense-objects, he, of deluded understanding, is called a hypocrite.  
To sit back physically retired is not the way to reach 
anywhere, much less the final State of Perfection. If this 
physical retirement is not e fficiently accompanied by an 
equal amount of mental and intellectual withdrawal from 
the sensuous fields, the spiritual future of such a 
misinformed seeker is surely very bleak and dreary.  
The truth of this statement is very well supported by 
modern text-books on psychology. To dissipate ourselves 
with immoral or criminal thou ghts is more harmful than 
to physically indulge in them. The mind has a tendency to 
repeat its own thoughts. When a single thought is 
repeated off and on, it crea tes in the mind a deepening 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
194 
 impression, and afterwards all thoughts arising in the 
mind irresistibly flow in that prepared channel. Once the 
direction of the flow in the mind has become fixed, all 
external activities of that in dividual become coloured by 
this characteristic tendency. A mind that constantly 
meditates on sensuous pleasures carves out for itself a 
deep sensuous tendency and ere long we discover that the 
individual is helplessly egged on to act in the external 
world, as he had tragically planned for himself in his 
mind.  
To give physically a show of morality and ethics, while 
mentally living a shameless life of low motives and foul 
sentiments, is the occupation of a man who is not a seeker 
of spiritual fulfilment, but, as is termed here, a self-
deluded hypocrite! Certainly we all know that, even if we 
can physically discipline oursel ves, it is not easy for an 
average man to control the sensuous tendencies at his 
mental level.  
KRISHNA REALISES THAT AN ORDINARY MAN 
WOULD NOT KNOW HOW TO SAVE HIMSELF FROM 
THIS NATURAL INSTINCT AND, THEREFORE, HE 
PRESCRIBES THE FOLLOWING STANZA:  
7. But, whosoever, controlling the senses by the mind, O 
Arjuna, engages his organs-of-action in KARMA YOGA, 
without attachment, he excels.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
195 
 In these two innocent lookin g lines we have the entire 
Science-of-Right-Action and the complete technique of 
right living. The ECONOMICS OF THOUGHT is a science 
unknown to the modern world while the thought 
economists of yore carved out a Rishi -India and guided 
the country to the golden era of its spiritual culture.  
The mind is fed and sustained, nurtured and nourished by 
the five organs-of-perception, with stimuli drawn from the 
outer world of sense-objects. The mind in us, as it were, 
flows out through the sense-organs, and when it comes in 
contact with their respective objects, the sense-organs 
perceive them. If the mind is not co-operating with the 
sense-organs, perception is impossible, even though the 
objects may be within the fiel d of the organs. That is why 
sometimes, when we are deeply attentive and fully 
interested in reading a book , we do not hear even when 
somebody calls us at our elbow. Examples can be 
multiplied.  
The prescription contained in this stanza asks a seeker to 
control the sense-organs by the mind. This can be 
effectively achieved only when the mind is given a 
brighter and diviner field to roam about in. To control the 
impetuosity of the mind with sheer will is like an attempt 
to dam a river while it is in flood. It is destined to be a futile attempt. Later on the Geeta will explain the 
technique of this control.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
196 
 This control of the sense-organs by the mind is only the 
negative aspect of the entire technique of right living. 
Ordinarily, we spend a lot of ou r life-energies in the fields 
of sense-objects. When th e sense-organs are thus 
controlled, we are conserving a large quantity of energy, 
and unless this gathered energy is immediately given a 
more profitable field of activity it is sure to break the 
bounds and flood the inner world and, perhaps, sweep 
away the entire personality equilibrium. The second line 
of this stanza advises us wh at we should do with the 
energies thus saved from their usual fields of dissipation.  
The stanza says that these en ergies must be spent in 
directing the seeker's organs-o f-action to the appropriate 
fields of activities. Even here, a very important precaution 
has been lovingly advised by Krishna. The Karma  Yogin  
has been warned to act with perfect detachment.  
When a camera is loaded with a piece of plain white 
paper, however long we may keep the lenses open against 
any well-lit object, no impression of the object concerned 
can dirty the paper! On the ot her hand, if that very same 
sheet of paper is sensitised, then, even a slight exposure 
will leave the impressions of the object upon it. Similarly, 
a mind plastered with attachment soon gathers on to itself 
impressions ( vasanas ) during its contacts in the external 
fields of activity. The Lord advises us to act without 
attachment, so that, instead of  gathering new impressions, 
we may make use of our activities for the exhaustion of 
the existing vasana -dirt in our mental equipment.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
197 
 The logical and scientific exposi t i o n  o f  t h i s  t h e o r y  i s  s o  
complete that, no student of the Geeta can discover in it 
any loopholes for hesitation or doubt.  
By withdrawing the organs-of-perception from their 
unprofitable fields of activity,  we save on the inner energy 
which is spent through the organs-of-activity on a chosen field of work; because of our inner attitude of non-
attachment during the activity, no new rubbish is 
gathered by our mind, but, on the contrary, it gets itself 
burnished by the removal of it s existing mental dirt. The 
very field of activity which or dinarily becomes a snare to 
capture and imprison a soaring, soul, itself becomes the 
exact art of self-liberation, wh en it is rightly employed by 
faithfully following the 'way-o f-life' advised in the Geeta.  
WHEREFORE:  
8. You perform (your) bounden duty; for, action is superior to 
inaction. Even the maintenance of the body would not be possible for you by inaction.  
In our work-a-day world, we must understand this term 
'bounden duty' ( Niyatam  Karma ) in the text, to include all 
"obligatory actions" of an in dividual in his home, in his 
office, and in the society as a national being. Thus, not to 
perform diligently all our duties in the home and in the 
world outside would be inaction. We are warned that 
even a healthy bodily existe nce is not possible if we were 
to live in complete inertia and inactivity. Inactivity brings 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
198 
 about the destruction of the na tion, of the society, and of 
the home, and often the very individual himself becomes 
victimised by his own idleness and suffers physical 
debilities and intellectual deterioration.  
IT IS ALSO WRONG TO SUPPOSE THAT ACTIONS 
LEAD TO BONDAGE AND TH AT THEY SHOULD NOT, 
THEREFORE, BE PERFORMED. --- WHY?  
9. The World is bound by action other than those performed 'for 
the sake of sacrifice' ; do thou, therefore, O son of Kunti, perform 
action of that sake (for YAJNA ) alone, free from all 
attachments.  
Every action does not bring about bondages upon the 
doer. It is only unintelligent activities that thicken the impressions in the mind, and thus successfully build a 
thick and impenetrable wall between the ego-centre and 
the unlimited Divine-Spark-o f-Life in us. Every action 
motivated by ego-centric desires thickens the veil and 
permits not even a single ray of the essential Divinity to 
peep through it, to illumine the life in us. According to the 
traditional translation, all activities other than the Yajna -
activities will bring about vasana -bondages, and the 
individual's ultimate development and growth will be arrested.  
Yajna  here means only "any self-sacrificing work, 
undertaken in a spirit of self-d edication, for the blessing of 
all." Such an action cannot be self-degrading and, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
199 
 therefore, it is self-liberating. The following stanzas also 
will become more and more clear, and universally 
appropriate in their meaning,  only when we understand 
Yajna  as "any social, communal,  national, or personal 
activity into which the individual is ready to pour himself 
forth entirely in a spirit of  service and dedication."  
Only when people come forwar d to act in a spirit of co-
operation and self-dedicatio n, can the community get 
itself freed from its shackles of poverty and sorrow. This is 
a fact endorsed by history. And such activities can be 
undertaken in a spirit of Divine loyalty, only when the 
worker has no attachment. Arju na's defect was that he got 
too attached to the individual s in the opposing forces, and 
he developed, consequently, wrong relationships with 
them. Therefore, he came to feel that he must run away 
from the field of work that had presented itself before 
him.  
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION 
SHOULD BE DONE BY HIM,  WHO IS QUALIFIED FOR 
IT:  
10. The PRAJAPATI (the Creator) , having in the beginning (of 
creation) created mankind, together with sacrifices, said, "by this shall you prosper; let this be  the milch-cow of your desire --- 
"KAMADHUK" (the mythological cow which yields all desired 
objects) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
200 
 Even when the Creator, the To tal-mind, puts up the show 
of the Universe of the Five Elements and brings forth the 
living organisms along with man, on this stage of life to 
work, to strive and to achieve, he creates also Yajna , "the 
spirit of self-dedicated activities." The Yajna -spirit is seen 
everywhere: the Sun shines, the Moon appears, the Sea 
throbs, the Earth bears --- all in a spirit of sacrifice and 
self-dedicated motherly love with never even a trace of 
attachment or any kind of self-arrogating motives.  
The whole world of cosmic powers, and nature's 
phenomena function instinctivel y in the service of all. 
Even before life could appear on  the face of the earth, the 
elemental forces had prepared th e field with their constant 
activities performed in the sacred spirit-of-dedication. 
Even when life developed and multiplied, at all levels, we 
can easily recognise different degrees of Yajna -activities, 
which keep up the harmonious growth of existence.  
The above idea, when poetic ally put, becomes this 
pregnant stanza in the Geeta. The Creator created the 
world along with the "spirit-of-service" and the "capacity-
for-sacrifice." As it were, th e Creator declared, "by this 
spirit of self-sacrifice shall you multiply; this shall be the 
milch-cow of your desires." Kamadhenu  is a mythological 
cow, supposed to have belonged to Sage Vasishta, from which all our desires could be milked out. The term, 
therefore, means only that no achievement is impossible 
for man, if he knows how to act in the discipline of co-
operation, and if he is ready to bring forth into his 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
201 
 activities the required amou nt of non-attachment and 
spirit of sacrifice.  
HOW CAN THIS BE ACHIEVED BY SACRIFICE?  
  
11. With this, you do nouris h the gods and may those DEVAS 
nourish you; thus nourishing one another, you shall, attain the Highest Good.  
The whole Vedic  concept of Devas  is that of one Universal 
Power, ever active in the world of phenomena, receiving 
appropriate names because of Its multiple functions. All Vedic  gods are but functional names of the one Supreme 
Creative Power manifesting in myriad forms.  
In understanding the stanza in its more universal 
application, we have to interpret the term Deva  as the very 
"presiding deity" in any field of activity, who blesses the worker in that field with his profit. The deity that blesses 
the worker in a field of acti vity can be nothing other than 
"THE PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL"  in that given field. 
When we apply in any situation our true and sincere 
work, the efforts and sacrifices so made, as it were, invoke 
the 'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL' in that situation, which 
comes to manifest and bless the worker. This becomes 
obvious when we try to unde rstand what we, in the 
modern world mean, when we say Mother India. In thus 
symbolising the might of a nation we mean the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
202 
 'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL" of that country in all her 
spheres of activities.  
It is obvious that the productivity that is dormant in any 
situation can be invoked only by man's sincere efforts. 
This potential which generally lies dormant everywhere is 
the Deva  to be cherished by the worker through the Yajna  
activities, and certainly the Deva  will manifest itself to 
cherish, or to bless the wo rker. "Thus cherishing one 
another, man shall gain the Highest Good," is the Divine 
intention in the mind of the creator, says Krishna in this 
stanza.  
The Law-of- Seva  is faithfully followed by every sentient 
and insentient member of th e cosmos instinctively. Man 
alone is given the freedom to act as he likes and to the 
extent he disobeys this Universal Law-of-Sacrifice, Yajna , 
to that extent he comes to suffer, because he, with his 
arrogant and egoistic action s, brings discord in the 
harmony of the existence around him.  
MOREOVER:    
12 "The DEVAS , nourished by the sacrif ice, will give you the 
desired objects. " Indeed he wh o enjoys objects, given by the 
DEVAS , without offering (in return) to them, is verily a thief.  
Here, Krishna repeats the unalterable ritualistic law "that 
the Devas , cherished by Yajna , will provide us with the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
203 
 desired objects." The truth of this statement becomes self-
evident and clear when we re-read this statement 
substituting our meaning for the terms Deva  and Yajna . 
The "productive potential" ( Deva ), when cherished 
through "self-dedicated work performed in a spirit of 
sacrifice" ( Yajna ), will provide the worker with the desired 
objects. This is the law-of-life.  
And when we thus earn a profit  due to our sacrifices, we 
have every right to enjoy that profit SHARING IT 
AMONG OURSELVES. But no living creature should 
enjoy benefits of others' acti ons without contributing his 
own share to the total effort. In the capitalistic system of 
life we notice the wrong tendency of self-aggrandisement 
of profits produced out of the collective efforts of millions 
of workers. This ultimately creates sad maladjustments in 
all spheres of activity, and national and international 
peace is threatened when we thus upset the law of 
harmony in life. When this idea, familiar in modern 
finance, "that a member of a society who consumes without producing is a liability to the nation," is re-read in 
the language of the Vedas , it is spelt as the second line of 
this stanza.  
HE WHO ENJOYS OBJECTS, GIVEN BY THE Devas , the 
"productive potential tapped," without offering his own Yajna -efforts into it, is termed here by Krishna as a 'social 
thief.' Considering the moral and ethical idealism 
recognised and respected at the time of the Geeta, the 
term 'thief' used here is indeed a powerful word, fully 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
204 
 implying the low depravity and disrespectful nature of 
such a social criminal who eats without producing.  
ON THE OTHER HAND:  
  
13. The righteous, who eat the "r emnants of the sacrifices" are 
freed from all sins; but those sinful ones, who cook food (only) for their own sake, verily eat but sin.  
As a contrast to such social criminals, feeding themselves 
upon the social wealth, in producing which they have not brought in any self-effort, in this stanza, we have the 
good, who receive for themse lves their "share," after 
sweating hard in sincere Yajna -activities. Such people, as 
explained here "go beyond all sins."  
Sins of the past are the causes for the present pains, and 
the present sins would be the causes for the future 
sorrows. Thus, all causes for the sorrows in social life 
would be, no doubt, removed, if the good and socially-
conscious members of a commun ity were to feel satisfied 
in enjoying the "remnants" of their co-operative work 
performed in the true Yajna -spirit.  
As a contrast to these, it ha s been declared that those who 
cook food for themselves alone,  "eat but sin." It seems that 
Krishna is perfectly against private property, not in the 
sense in which a communist would understand it. Krishna 
seems to be against the princi ple of arrogation  of wealth, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
205 
 and of hoarding the same, motivated by lust of lucre, 
meant mainly for selfish enjoyment, utterly regardless of 
the privations and poverty of the unfortunate folks 
around in the community. It is said that such hoarders of 
wealth "eat but sin."  
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION 
SHOULD BE PERFORMED BY HIM WHO IS QUALIFIED 
FOR ACTION. FOR, IT IS  ACTION THAT SETS THAT 
WHEEL OF THE UNIVERSE  MOVING. HOW? THE 
ANSWER FOLLOWS:  
  
14. From food come forth beings; from rain food is produced; 
from sacrifice arises rain, and sacrifice is born of action.  
  15. Know you that action comes from BRAHMAJI (the creator) 
and BRAHMAJI come from the Imperishable. Therefore, the all-
pervading BRAHMAN (God-principle) ever rests in sacrifice .  
The cosmic-wheel-of-cooperativ e-action is being narrated 
here in the familiar language of the Vedas . The living 
creatures are born out of food, and they are nourished by 
food. The mineral-wealth of the world becomes 
assimilable food --- both as vegetarian and non-vegetarian 
--- only by the action of rai n upon it. But for rains the 
vegetables will not grow, and the lack of proper grazing-
grounds is a danger to cattle-wealth. "Rains come as a result of Yajna , and Yajnas  are performed through human 
action."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
206 
 This stanza may read strangely  to those who are not ready 
to bring the full shaft of their intelligence for the purpose 
of understanding it. It is evident to any modern educated 
man that living creatures are born out of matter. Matter is 
rendered consumable and digestible, nutritive and 
assimilable, only by the action of rains upon it. But the 
difficulty in understanding the stanza is when we come to 
the next assertion that "the rains come as a result of 
Yajnas ."  
But in Krishna's words here, we are not warranted in 
accepting that he is advising Arjuna to follow ritualism. In 
this stanza, as also elsewhere all along the Geeta, the 
familiar terms of the Vedic  period has been charged with 
new meanings and significances. "Rain" is the essential 
condition for the conversion of the mineral-raw-material 
into enjoyable and nutritive food. Similarly, in all fields of 
activity there is "an enjoya ble profit" which can be 
gathered only when the fiel ds come under "conditions 
favourable" for them to produce those profits. "Self-dedicated activities" ( Yajna ), when performed in any given 
field of endeavour, will be creating therein "conditions 
necessary for the field to smile forth" (rain) in a luxurious 
"crop of profit" ( Annam ), enjoyable by the society.  
For example, the wasteful waters of a river flowing idly 
can be dammed and made use of, if the waters are 
intelligently employed in irrigating the fertile lands now 
lying fallow on its banks. Through sacrifice and work 
alone can the dam be built and wh en it is built, it provides 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
207 
 "conditions helpful" for bringing the lands on either side 
under the plough. Again, for ma king use of irrigated land, 
man has yet to strive: ploughing, sowing, weeding, 
waiting, gathering --- before he can come to enjoy the 
profit of his activities, the food.  
We are shown how this Wheel-of-Action (stanza-15), is 
connected with and includes the Supreme. The principle 
of right action, nay, even the power to act, has come out of 
the Creator himself and the Crea tor is none other than the 
Imperishable Supreme. Action  IS in the new-born live 
baby; action is a gift from the Creator! Therefore, the All-
pervading Supreme is ever centred in all undertakings 
pursued, by one or many peop le, in an honest spirit of 
Self-dedication, for the good of all.  
HE, WHO LIVES IN UNISON WITH THIS WHEEL-OF-
ACTION, IS CONTRIBUTING TO THE HARMONY OF 
LIFE. WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM WHO DISOBEYS?  
  
16. He who does not follow here th e wheel thus set revolving, is 
of a sinful life, rejoicing in the senses. He lives in vain, O Son of Pritha.  
Every member in the entire kingdom of the minerals, the 
vegetables and the dumb-creat ures, instinctively follows 
this principle of Yajna  and contributes thereby to the 
smooth running of the Universal-Wheel-of-Action. 
Among living creatures, man alone has been allowed the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
208 
 FREEDOM OF ACTION to contribute to the harmony, or 
to bring about discord in the smooth running of this 
cosmic mechanism. So long as the majority of a generation 
manage to live abiding by the Law-of-Harmony they shall 
grow from strength to stre ngth, opening up fields of 
happiness for themselves. Such periods are called the 
golden eras of their social and cultural life.  
But, this faithful obedience is not always possible, for all 
of them, at all times. At certain periods of history, man, as 
a social being, comes to revolt against this Eternal Law, 
and then, life starts slipping away from its peaceful 
domain of constructive growth, and shatters itself in 
tearful ruin. Such ages are the dark ages of despair and 
restlessness, war and pestilence, flood and famine.  
The question naturally arises as to why the bright day of 
the world slowly sets itself to  bring in the dark night of 
chaos. The explanation is given here in the Geeta.  
A community is made up of its individuals. However 
much we may glorify the achi evements of the community 
as such, we cannot totally ignore the contributions made 
by the units constituting the community --- the 
individuals. If the individual s are perfect, the community 
works smoothly. But, if the units are wrongly composed, 
then the entire healthy growth and strength of structure in 
the total collapses. The individuals' negative existence 
starts with their pre-occupation  with their senses. In their 
limited recognition that they are themselves nothing more 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
209 
 than their body, they beco me pre-occupied with its 
nourishment and fattening. As a body, they cannot 
perceive the Higher 'ways of life'; nor can they entertain 
any goal other than seeking satisfactions for their mere 
animal passions.  
In such an era, nobody woul d come forward to work in 
the redeeming noble spirit of Yajna , without which, no 
"favourable circumstances" (rain), could be created for the 
"productive potentials" ( Devas ) to manifest themselves as 
nourishing joy. Seekers of sense ( Indriya-ramah ), they 
compete among themselves, ea ch seeking with lustful 
greed, his own selfish happiness, and they, often 
unconsciously, bring about a discordant rhythm in the 
Wheel-of-Action. Such people are considered by the Geeta 
as "living in sin," and the Divi ne Song asserts, "they live in 
vain."  
NOW THE LORD HIMSELF SUPPOSES ARJUNA TO 
ASK THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: "IS THE WHEEL-
OF-ACTION, THUS SET IN MOTION, TO BE 
FOLLOWED BY ALL, OR BY HIM ONLY WHO HAS 
NOT YET ATTAINED FIRM FA ITH IN THE PATH OF 
KNOWLEDGE?"  
  
17. But the man who rejoices only in the Self, who is satisfied 
with the Self, who is content in the Self alone, for Him verily 
there is nothing (more) to be done.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
210 
 The Wheel-of-Action explained above is generally 
applicable to the majority of seekers, and actions in the 
world undertaken in a spirit of Yajna  integrate their 
personality and make them more and more prepared for 
the highest vocation in life, meditation. Through selfless 
work, an individual gains an increasing amount of inner 
poise and when such a single-p ointed mind is brought to 
function at the meditation seat, the meditator gains the 
experience of transcending hi s limited ego. To such a 
perfected one, work is not a training to purify himself but 
it is a fulfilment of his own God-realisation.  
It is a fact that we are egged on to activity seeking and 
demanding a better SATISFACTION and a complete 
CONTENTMENT. Satisfaction and contentment are the 
two wheels of the life-chariot. In order to gain a better 
satisfaction and to reach nearer the point of contentment 
we are goaded to act in the outer world, to earn and to 
save, to hoard and to spend.  But the man of perfection, 
who on transcending his limited identification with his matter-envelopments, when he gets himself ushered into 
the All-perfect Realm of the Spirit, he comes to feel so 
satisfied with the State of Self-hood which he thereby 
attains, that he experiences a complete sense of 
contentment in the very Divine Nature, and that provides 
eternal satisfaction for him.  
Where satisfaction and contentment have arrived, there, in 
that bosom, desires cannot arise at all; and where the 
desires are not, there cannot be any action. Thus, the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
211 
 effects ( Karya ) are not possible in him; the effects of the 
spiritual 'ignorance'and 'desires,' 'thoughts' and 'actions.' 
Naturally, in such an indi vidual there cannot be any 
"obligatory duty"; all work has been at once fulfilled in 
him. Thereafter, he is free to act, or not to act, to serve, or 
not to serve, and lives as a God-man upon the earth.  
MOREOVER:  
  
18. For him there is here no intere st whatever in what is done, 
or what is not done; nor does he  depend upon any being for any 
object.  
An ordinary man is whipped up to action either because 
of his anxiety to gain a profit or because of his fear that by 
not doing work he will be incurring a loss. But an 
individual, who has the subj ective experience of the 
spiritual stature in him, who has, therefore, discovered an 
Eternal satisfaction in his own Self, and who has reached 
perfect contentment therein, will have no more action to 
perform, for he has nothing more to gain through activity, 
nor can he have any fear of losing anything in the world 
due to non-performance of any action. Such an individual, 
rooted in the experience of the Self, and depending upon nothing --- neither any being nor any object --- for his joy 
and bliss, has discovered the "Subject"; the objects-of-the-
world are essentially nothing other than the "Subject," 
being tossed on the waves of agitations in the mind.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
212 
 'YOU HAVE NOT ATTAI NED TO THE RIGHT 
KNOWLEDGE, ALL-PERVADING LIKE THE FLOOD 
WATERS, (II-46) WHEREFORE":  
  
19. Therefore, always perform ac tions which should be done, 
without attachment; for, by performing action without 
attachment, man attains the Supreme.  
We have already noticed that Krishna pre-supposes no 
knowledge in his friend, nor does he thrust upon Arjuna 
bare statements that are to be  blindly believed and silently 
swallowed by him. Proselytisation is not the technique of 
Vedanta . Hindus are strangers to it. Every strong statement 
of fact is preceded by a line of logical thoughts explained 
at length. Till now Krishna wa s explaining the 'wheel-of-
action,' and after exhausting the exposition of this entire 
theory, he, in this stanza, is crystallising his conclusions 
encouraging Arjuna to act.  
Therefore, always perform actions which are obligatory in 
your present social status, in your domestic situation, as a 
member of your community and the nation. Even here, 
Krishna is repeating his warnin g to Arjuna that he must 
be careful in all his activities, to keep his mind away from all dangerous "attachments." The Lord has already 
explained how "attachments" directly help to form 
tendencies in the mind and deepen fresh vasana -
impressions within.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
213 
 "FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO YOU 
SHOULD PERFORM ACTION":  
  
20. Janaka and others attained Perfec tion verily by action only; 
even with a view to protecting the masses you should perform action.  
Thus, the wise Kings of yore, such as Janaka and 
Ashwapati , had tried to attain Perfection, ( Samsiddhi ), by 
the 'Path-of-Action.' Th ey were men of right 
understanding as they tried to liberate themselves 
through right actions performed in a spirit of detachment 
and self-dedication. They had set an example to the world 
by their achievement through an immaculate life of 
service.  
Krishna means that Arjuna too, a prince by birth, and one 
who has taken upon himself the entire responsibility of 
mobilising and fighting the war, should respect his 
Prarabdha  and act diligently with out running away from 
the battle-field as he had earlier intended to do. This is the 
only method by which he can gain a complete vasana -
exhaustion in himself. Born as a king, he had a greater 
responsibility towards the community, than any other member. Therefore, it was his duty that he should keep to 
his post and work diligently.  
A creeper will never grow in a desert. It is nature's law 
that every living creature finds itself in the most 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
214 
 conducive outerworld conditions. Thus viewed, because 
of the very fact that he had manifested himself as a son of 
his father in the family of kings, nature had judged that 
the most conducive circumstance in life for Arjuna was 
the life of a prince, daring da ngers, fighting enemies, and 
generally ordering peaceful and progressive growth for 
the society.  
"WHO SHOULD SECURE THE WELFARE OF THE 
WORLD? AND HOW?" THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:  
  
21. Whatever a great man does, that  other men also do (imitate) 
; whatever he sets up as the standard, that the world (people) follows.  
Man is essentially an imitating animal. This is a 
psychological truth. The moral rejuvenation of a society in any period of history can take place only because of the 
example set up by the leaders of that nation. Students can 
be disciplined only when teachers are well-behaved; the 
minor officials cannot be kind and honest when the rulers 
of the country are corrupt tyrants. Children's behaviour 
depends entirely upon, and is ever controlled by, the 
standard of purity and culture of their parents.  
With this Krishna raises his next argument on why Arjuna 
should act in the world. Unless he diligently acts, the 
chances are that the entire community will follow the low 
standard of retreat from acti on set up by him and thus 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
215 
 they will ultimately invite a general decadence of culture 
in life.  
Now, to emphasise the point and to make a lasting 
impression upon Arjuna of the teaching so far given (III-4 
to 21), Lord Krishna indicates himself as an example. The 
Lord, though already a liberated soul ( Mukta ), is acting 
diligently, without attachment, as a model, for his 
generation to rise up above th e slothfulness of the age into 
vigorous activity.  
The very creed of Krishna is "active resistance to evil." His 
non-violence is not the instinctive incapacity of the day-dreaming coward who cannot stand up against injustice 
and fight for the accepted principles of national culture. 
There could not have been any doubt now left in the mind 
of Arjuna regarding the effica cy of the 'Path-of-Action' 
advised to him.  
"IF YOU HAVE A DOUBT AS REGARDS THE 
NECESSITY FOR WORKING FOR THE PROTECTION 
OF THE MASSES, WHY DO YOU NOT OBSERVE ME? 
WHY DO YOU NOT FOLLOW MY EXAMPLE, AND TRY 
TO PREVENT THE MASSES FROM GOING ASTRAY, 
SETTING UP FOR THEM AN EXAMPLE IN 
YOURSELF?"  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
216 
 22 There is nothing in the three worl ds, O Partha, that has to be 
done by Me, nor is there anythi ng unattained that should be 
attained by Me; yet, I engage Myself in action.  
Being a Perfect-Man, a true Yogi , Krishna had no more 
desire for achieving or gainin g anything in the world. Had 
He wanted a kingdom all for Himself, He could have 
easily carved out one, but He  was in the battle-front only 
with a sense of duty towards the noble and the righteous 
cause the Pandavas stood for.  
The life of the Lord till the very moment of the 
Mahabharata war had been a perfect life of complete 
detachment and even then --- even though there was 
nothing He had not gained, nor had He anything further 
to gain --- He was spending Himself constantly in activity, 
as though work was to Him a rapturous game of 
enthusiasm and joy.  
CONTINUING THE SAME ARGUMENT, THE LORD 
SAYS:  
  
23. For, should I not ever enga ge Myself in ac tion, without 
relaxation, men would in every way follow My Path, O son of Pritha.  
Why should the Lord work? Wh at would be the loss to the 
generation if He were not to work at all? The masses 
always imitate their leaders and heroes in their dress, in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
217 
 their behaviour, in their moral values, in their actions, in 
all the branches of their acti vities. They fix their measure 
of perfection always by watc hing the standard of life of 
their leaders. If the Lord did not continue to work without 
relaxation, men also would fo llow in His wake and sink 
themselves into inactivity an d so into an unproductive 
existence. In nature ever ything acts constantly and 
sincerely. The entire Universe survives and sustains itself 
by activity.  
In these stanzas, as everywhere , all along in the Geeta, the 
first person singular is used by Lord Krishna, not in the 
sense of the Blue Boy of Vrindavana, but as the Atman , or 
the Self-realised Man-of-Perfection. A liberated soul 
realises himself to be nothing other than the Spirit, upon 
which alone is the play of matter sustained, as the dream 
is sustained upon the waker. If this God-principle, though 
inactive in Itself, does not consistently serve the pluralistic 
phenomenal world as its permanent substratum, the 
world as it is now, cannot exis t. The ocean never rises, in 
spite of the billows. Yet, it is a fact that without the ocean 
the waves cannot rise or dance.  Similarly, if the Lord were 
not to keep on activity serving the world, the cultural life 
of the generation would stagnate.  
"AND WHAT HARM IS THERE IF I DO NOT ACT?"... 
THE LORD SAYS:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
218 
 24. These worlds would perish if  I did not perf orm action; I 
would be the author of confusion of "castes, " and would destroy these beings.  
If I do not perform action, it will not be conducive to the 
harmonious progress of the Universe, and the entire super-structure of our scientifi c laws and calculations will 
tumble down. The Universe is not a chaos; it is a cosmos. 
Lawless-ness is not noticed anywhere in the working of 
the cosmic forces.  
The phenomenal happenings, the movement of the 
planets, the rhythmic dance of the seasons, the music of 
creation, the law of colours are all happening in a 
harmony, implicitly obeying the law governing them all, 
and this Law is otherwise called the Mighty Power of 
Nature, or God. Lord Krishna, as an embodiment of God-
hood, is declaring here: "If I do not perform work, the 
world would perish." Scientifically viewed, this 
declaration is not a superstitious absurdity, acceptable 
only to the blind believers, but it becomes a statement of fact, which even the microscope-gazers cannot honestly 
deny.  
The Lord represents not only the law governing the outer 
world of things and beings, bu t He is also the Law that 
governs the inner world of thoughts and emotions. The 
whole human society is divided into the four "castes" 
(Varna ), by the Hindu saints and sages, ON THE BASIS 
OF THE INDIVIDUALS' MENTAL TEMPERAMENTS. In 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
219 
 case the law governing the inner psychological 
temperaments is not functioning strictly, there will be 
confusion in behaviour and instability in character. The 
general translation "adm ixture of races" for " Varna-
Shankara " contains a mischievous suggestion for the 
modern students inasmuch as they would directly 
understand it as a Divine sanction for the "caste-tyrannies" 
that are going on in the decadent Hindu society.  
"SUPPOSE, ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU, ARJUNA, 
THINK --- OR SUPPOSE, FOR THAT MATTER, ANY 
OTHER MAN THINKS --- THAT ONE WHO HAS 
ACHIEVED HIS GOAL OF SELF-REALISATION, EVEN 
HE SHOULD WORK FOR THE WELFARE OF THE 
OTHERS, ALTHOUGH FOR HIMSELF HE MAY HAVE 
NOTHING MORE TO ACHIEVE OR GAIN"...  
  
25. As the "ignorant" men act fr om attachment to action, O 
Bharata, so should the "wise" men act without attachment, wishing the welfare of the world.  
It is very well known that a ll of us act in our own given 
fields of activities with all enthusiasm and deep interest, 
all day through, every day of the year and all through the years of our entire life-ti me. An average member of 
society is seen to wear himself out in the strain of constant 
activity. Irrespective of his he alth, careless of the severity 
of seasons, through joy and so rrow, man constantly strives 
to earn and to hoard, to  gain and to enjoy.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
220 
 Here Krishna says that a Man-of-Self-realisation also 
works in the world with as much diligence and sincerity, 
tireless enthusiasm and energizing joy, burning hopes and 
scalding fears, as any ordinary man striving in the 
competitions of the market-place. The only difference 
between the two is that, while  the ignorant acts and is 
motivated in his actions by his "attachments and anxieties 
for the fruits," a man of Godly intentions or complete 
Perfection will work in the world, without attachment, 
only for the purpose of the redemption of the world.  
This subtle difference between the activities of the "wise" 
and the "ignorant" may not st rike the modern reader as 
very important unless his attention is directed towards its 
universal application. It is the anxious "desire for the 
fruits" that dissipates the fine r and nobler energies in the 
worker, and condemns his ac tivity to utter failure. No 
doubt, even a Man-of-God, when he acts, must bring into 
his field of activity his own mind and intellect.  
The mind can function only when it is attached to 
something. It cannot remain alive, and yet, detached from 
every thing. "Detachment of the mind" mentioned here is 
only its "detachment from  the FALSE irresistible 
fascination for objects" and this is gained through the 
process of "attaching itself to the NOBLER." Thus, when 
Lord Krishna says  
here, that the "wise" man should work "without 
attachments" he immediately indicates how this can be 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
221 
 achieved. He advises Arjuna to act, "Desirous of guiding 
the world"  
(Loka-sangraha ).  
Attachment becomes a clog or a painful chain on us only 
when it is extremely ego-centric. To the extent we work 
for larger schemes to bless a vaster section of humanity, to 
that extent the attachment loses its poison and comes to 
bless the age. Many poisons serve as medicines in their 
diluted form, while the same in a concentrated form can 
bring instantaneous death! The ego and ego-centric 
desires bind and destroy man, but to the extent he can lift his identifications to include and accommodate in it, 
larger sections of the living world, to that extent the 
attachment gathers an ethical halo, a divine glow, and 
becomes a cure for our subjecti ve pains and imperfections.  
Here the practical method suggested is that Arjuna should 
work, unattached to his own ego-centric, limited concept 
of himself and his relations, and he must enter into the 
battle-field as a champion figh ting for a cause, noble and 
righteous, against the armies that have come up to 
question and challenge the deathless 'values of higher 
living' as propounded and upheld by the Hindu culture.  
TO SUCH A MAN-OF-WISDOM WHO IS WORKING IN 
SOCIETY FOR THE SERVICE OF MAN, THE 
FOLLOWING ADVICE IS GIVEN:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
222 
   
26. Let no wise-man unsettle the minds of ignorant-people, who 
are attached to action; he should  engage them in all actions, 
himself fulfilling th em with devotion.  
The chances are that when a man of equipoise and Self-
discovery enters the field of activity, he will be tempted to 
advise his generation on pure ethics and abstract 
ideologies. The generation, misunderstanding the words 
and emphasis of such a Master, might come to a wrong 
conclusion that, to renounce activity was the direct path to 
Truth. The teachers are warned against such a hasty 
guidance which might damp the enthusiasm of the 
generation to act.  
Life is dynamic. Nobody can sit idle. Even the idler 
contributes to the general activity. In this ever-surging 
onward rush of life's full impetuosity, if there be a foolish 
guide who would plunge hims elf in the mid-stream and 
stand with upraised hands, howling to the generation to 
halt, he would certainly be pulverized by the ever-moving flood of life and its endless ac tivities. Many a hasty Master 
has made this mistake and has had to pay for it. Krishna is 
declaring here only a Universal law for the guidance of 
the saints and sages of Indi a that they should not go 
against the spirit of the times and be a mere revolt against 
life's own might and power.  
In this stanza is given out the art of guiding mankind, 
which can be used by every leader in all societies, be they 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
223 
 social workers, or political masters, or cultural teachers. A 
society, that is functioning in a particular line of activity at 
any given period of history, sh ould not be, all of a sudden, 
arrested in its flow, says Kr ishna, but the leader should 
fall in line with the generation, and slowly and steadily 
guide it to act in the right-di rection, by his own example.  
A traveller motoring with the idea of going to Hardwar 
may miss his way and speed down towards Saharanpur, 
but the way to guide him back to the main road is not to 
halt him; because, by halting, he will never reach his own 
destination, or any other goal. So long as the wheels are 
not revolving on the road, distances are not covered. 
Keeping the wheels on the mo ve, he has to change the 
direction of his movements until he comes to his right 
path, heading towards Hardwar.  
Similarly, man should act and ev en if he be acting in the 
WRONG DIRECTION, through action alone can he come 
to the RIGHT PATH of diviner activities, and gain the 
fulfilment of his Perfection. No  'wise'-man should unsettle 
his generation's firm faith in action. He must himself 
diligently perform the ordinary  actions in a diviner and 
better fashion, and he must make himself an example to 
the world, so that the le sser folk may automatically 
imitate him and learn to follo w his unfailing footsteps.  
IN WHAT WAY IS AN 'IGNORANT MAN ATTACHED 
TO ACTION?  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
224 
   
27. All actions are performed, in  all cases, merely by the 
Qualities-in-Nature (GUNAS ) . He whose mind is deluded by 
egoism, thinks "I am the doer. "  
All along Krishna has been in sisting that nobler actions 
are actions without attachment. This is easier said than done. Even if one intellectually accepts this idea, it is not 
at all easy for him to act up to it. To everyone of us the 
difficulty is that we know not how to get ourselves 
detached from our activities, and still act on in the field. 
The Lord gives here a method of discrimination by which 
we can easily develop the requir ed amount of detachment.  
We had explained earlier how spiritual IGNORANCE 
expresses itself at the intellectual level as DESIRES, which 
again, in the mental zone, manifests as THOUGHTS, and 
the very thoughts, coloured by our mental tendencies, 
manifest themselves, in their fulfilment in the outer 
world-of-objects, as our ACTIONS. Thus, the tendencies of 
the mind ( vasanas ) express in the outerworld as actions. 
Where there are noble-thoughts, there, noble-actions manifest. When the thoughts ar e agitated, the actions also 
are uncertain, faltering, and confused. And where the 
thoughts are dull and animalistic, the actions generated 
from them are also correspon dingly base, vicious, and 
cruel. Thus, the mind's projec tions in the outer-world are 
in fact a kind of crystallisation of the mental Vasana  
among the objects of the world and these constitute the 
"actions."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
225 
 Where there is a mind, there actions also must be 
performed. These actions are therefore GENERATED by 
the mind, STRENGTHENED in the mind and ultimately 
PERFORMED with the mind. Bu t the individual, due to 
his wrong identification with his own mind, gets the false 
notion that he himself is the "actor" --- the "doer." This 
action-arrogating-ego naturally  starts feeling an anxiety 
for its success and a burning at tachment for the result of 
its actions.  
In a dream, we create a worl d of our own and we identify 
ourselves with the world so ma de, and this IDENTIFIER is 
called the 'dreamer.' We all kn ow that the sorrows of the 
dream all belong to the 'dreamer' and to no one else. The 
'dreamer' is liberated from his pains when he ends his 
identification with the dream kingdom. Similarly, the 
actions in the world outside, which are nothing other than 
the vasanas  existing in one's own mind, cannot of 
themselves give one any attachment, but the attachment is 
felt by one who gets identified with one's own mental conditions. The moment one understands this simple fact, 
all one's attachments end, and therefore, one lives in 
perfect peace.  
This identification with the mental condition creates the 
false sense of ego which arrogates to itself the idea: "I am the doer." The "doer" demands the FRUITS OF HIS 
ACTION. To get over this attachment is to end this 
misconception.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
226 
 BUT AS REGARDS THE 'WISE' MAN:  
  
28. But he --- who knows the Truth, O mighty-armed, about the 
divisions of the qual ities and (their) func tions, and he who 
knows that GUNAS -as-senses move amidst GUNAS -as-
objects, is not attached.  
As a contrast to the point-o f-view of the 'ignorant' man 
explained in the last stanza, Krishna explains here the attitude of the 'wise' man when he ploughs the field of 
activity. In him, attachment has no place, because of his 
constant, discriminating understanding that in all 
activities, it is his mind that projects out to form the action. 
When once the 'wise' man has realised that actions belong 
to the world of the mind, he is no more anxious for the 
fruits thereof. Success and failure thereafter belong to the 
mind and not to him. Likes an d dislikes thereafter are of 
the mind and not his. Loves and hatreds are not his but of 
the mind. Thus, in complete inner freedom the God-man 
functions, as a true sportsman in his play-field, where the very enjoyment is in the sport and not in the score.  
Here, Arjuna is addressed as the 'mighty-armed,' and this 
is very significant in the mout h of Krishna at this moment. 
The very term reminds us of Arjuna's wondrous heroism 
as the greatest archer of his time. The implication is that a 
true hero is not one who can face an army and kill a few, 
but one who can save himself. A true warrior is only he 
who can tirelessly fight in the inner world, and gain a 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
227 
 victory over his own mind an d attachments. One who can 
act in the world's battle-field of actions, ever ruling over 
and never surrendering to the arrows of attachments that 
fly towards one from all directions, is the real Immortal 
Hero, who can thereafter sit unarmed on the chariots of 
mortal heroes, and without rai sing any weapon, can guide 
the destinies of many an army in every Kurukshetra! That 
Master Hero is called Tattwavit  --- one who "knows" the 
Reality --- the Self.  
NOW:    
29. Those deluded by the qualities of nature, (GUNAS) , are 
attached to the functions of th e qualities. The Man-of-Perfect-
Knowledge should not unsettle the 'foolish, ' who are of imperfect knowledge.  
Although many know that all actions are the attempts of 
the mental impressions to fulfil themselves in the outer world, only the Perfect-one realises this Truth and 
generally becomes quiet and unattached in all his 
activities. The majority of us are in a state of complete 
delusion and are entirely victimised by our own mental 
temperaments. The flood of life, surging out through these existing vasana -channels, should not be blockaded in the 
activity. The advice given by Krishna in the earlier stanza 
(26) is, again for the purpose of  emphasis, repeated here in 
different words.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
228 
 The dull-witted one, unconsciously victimised by his own 
mental impressions, acts in the world outside shackled by 
a thousand burning attachments. A sage or a saint should 
not come into the arena of life to decry such a man's 
activities all of a sudden. Krishna's suggestion is that, 
while feeding the fire of life, he should carefully guide its 
flow into the right channel wherein the flood of life can 
reach to water the gardens of cultural development in the 
individual as well as in the community.  
"HOW THEN SHOULD ACTIONS BE PERFORMED BY 
THE 'IGNORANT' MAN WHO SEEKS LIBERATION 
FROM HIS OWN SENSE OF FINITUDE, WHEN HE IS 
QUALIFIED ONLY FOR ACTION?" THE ANSWER 
FOLLOWS:  
  
30. Renouncing all actions in Me, with the mind centered on the 
Self, free from hope and egoism  (ownership) , free from (mental) 
fever, (you) do fight!  
It has been clearly declared that the Divine opinion of the 
Lord is that Arjuna should fight. The Pandava prince is 
not, at present, fit for the higher contemplative life of pure 
meditation. Action has a tendency to create new impressions which again procre ate impulses to act more 
vigorously. In order to avoid creation of new Vasanas  even 
while acting for the purpose of Vasana -exhaustion, 
Krishna had already advised th e method of acting without 
the spirit of ego, or ego-centri c desires. The same theory is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
229 
 explained here while expounding a technique by which 
this consummation can actu ally be brought about.  
RENOUNCE ALL ACTIONS IN ME --- We have already 
noticed that by the first-person pronoun Krishna means 
the Supreme Self, the Divine, the Eternal. Renouncing all 
activities unto Him, with a mind soaked with devoted remembrances of the Self ( Adhyatma  Chetasa ), the Lord 
advises Arjuna to act on. Renu nciation of action does not 
mean an insipid life of inactivity. Actions performed 
through attachment and desires are renounced the 
moment we take away from action the ego-centric and the 
selfish stink.  
A serpent is dangerous only as long as its fangs are not 
removed. The moment these ar e taken out, even the most 
poisonous reptile becomes a tame creature incapable of 
harming anyone. Similarly, action gives rise to bondage 
only when it is performed wi th a heart laden with selfish-
desires. Actions performed without desires are not actions 
at all, inasmuch as they are incapable of producing any 
painful reactions. Here, the re nunciation of action only 
means the giving up of th e wrong motives behind the 
actions.  
The purification of the motive s is possible only when the 
mind is made to sing constantly the Divine Songs praising 
the glories of the Self. In the song of Truth the heart begins 
to throb with the highest Divine impulses. Actions 
performed in the outer world by  such an individual are no 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
230 
 more the ordinary actions but they become expressions of 
the Supreme Will through that individual. When the 
limited ego is replaced by the constant feeling of the Lord 
--- as "I am the Supreme" --- such an individual becomes 
the most efficient instrument  for the expression of the 
Divine Will.  
Not only is it sufficient that  we renounce thus all wrong 
actions, but we have also to  make a few adjustments in 
our inner instruments in order to bring out an 
unobstructed flow of the Cr eator's Will through us. These 
are indicated here by the two terms "without hope" and 
"without ego."  
A superficial study of the stanza is sure to confuse the 
student and drive him to the dangerous conclusion that 
Hinduism preaches, not a dynamic conscious life, but an 
insentient existence through life  in a spirit of cultivated 
hopeless-ness! But a closer study of the import of these 
two terms will make us understand clearly that, in this 
stanza, Krishna is hinting at a great psychological truth of 
life!  
WITHOUT HOPE --- Hope is "the expectation of a 
happening that is yet to manifest and mature in a 
FUTURE PERIOD OF TIME." Whatever be the hope, it 
belongs not to the present; it refers to a period of time not 
yet born.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
231 
 WITHOUT EGO --- Our ego-centric concept of ourselves 
is nothing but "a bundle of  happenings and achievements 
of ours which took place, or were gained, in the past 
moments." Ego is therefore "the shadow of the past," and 
it has an existent reality only with reference to THE DEAD 
MOMENTS OF THE PAST.  
If hope is thus the child of the unborn future, ego is the 
lingering memory of a dead pa st. To revel in ego and hope 
is an attempt on our part to live, either with the dead 
moments of the past, or with  the unborn moments of the 
future. All the while, the tr agedy is that we miss the 
'present,' the active dynamic 'present,' which is the only 
noble chance that is given to us to create, to advance, to 
achieve, and to enjoy. Krishna advises Arjuna, therefore, 
to act renouncing both hope an d ego; and this is indeed a 
primary instruction on how to pour the best that is in us 
into the 'present,' blockading all unintelligent and 
thoughtless dissipation of our inner-personality-energies, 
in the 'past' and the 'future.'  
The instruction is so exhaustive in vision, and complete in 
its minutest details, that the stanza under review should 
be a surprise even to the best of our modern 
psychologists. Even though the technique so far advised 
can, and does, avoid all wastage of energy among the funeral pyres of the dead mo ments and in the wombs of 
unborn Time, yet, there is a chance for the man of action 
wasting his potentialities in the very 'present.' This 
generally comes through our inborn nature to get 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
232 
 ourselves unnecessarily over-anxious during our present 
activities. This FEVERISH AN XIETY is indicated here by 
the term "fever" ( Jwara ). Krishna advises that Arjuna 
should renounce all actions unto the Lord and, getting rid 
of both hope and selfishness, must fight, free from all 
mental fever. How complete this technique is will be 
evident now to all students of the Geeta.  
The term "fight" is to be understood here "as our 
individual fight with circumstan ces, in the silent battle of 
life." Thus, the advice is not for Arjuna alone, but to all 
men who would like to live life fully and intelligently!  
The advice contained in this stanza reads as though quite 
unorthodox for those who have read the Vedas , with a 
limited meaning for its term " Karma-Yoga ."  
IN ORDER TO HAMMER THIS NEW 
INTERPRETATION OF THE VEDIC  TRUTH INTO THE 
ACCEPTANCE OF HIS GENERATION, THE LORD 
SAYS:  
  
31. Those men who constantly practise this teaching of Mine, 
full of faith and without cavil ling, they too are freed from 
actions.  
It is clearly brought out here that the above technique can 
bless us not by a mere study of it, but only when it has 
been properly practised in life. The term religion ( matam ) 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
233 
 in Sanskrit, means 'opinion.' This is "Krishna's opinion" --- 
Sri Krishna's Matam . The philosophy of spirituality is 
universal and, therefore, the same everywhere. But 
religions differ from prophet to prophet, because there are 
many different OPINIONS entertained by these different 
Masters, regarding the be st manner by which their 
particular generations could be guided towards the final 
experience of the Eternal-Factor.  
One ought not to live through life as a mere beast of 
burden doing its daily rout ine and sweating under the 
driver's whip. Work only hardens the muscles; it can 
smoothen out the ugly wrinkles  in our character and add 
a glow of health and vitality to our inner personality only 
when we bring the inner equipments of our heart and 
head into the work which our hands and legs perform in 
the outer world. This is a ccomplished by pursuing the 
Karma  Yoga  advised earlier, with full faith ( Shraddha ) and 
without cavilling ( Anasuyantah ).  
FAITH ( Shraddha ) --- is a very pregnant word in Sanskrit 
which refuses to be defined fully by any single word in 
English.  
But Shankara's explanation of Shraddha  has a purely 
intellectual import and it has no direct emotional appeal 
for the seeker. "Faith" in Vedanta  means the ability to 
digest mentally, and compre hend intellectually, the full 
import of the advice of the Saints and the declarations of 
the Scriptures. In fact withou t "faith" no activity is ever 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
234 
 possible; and "faith" cannot grow where intellectual 
convictions have not come to play in their full blaze.  
WITHOUT CAVILLING ( Anasuyantah ) --- A mere 
intellectual theory cannot be understood and appreciated 
without our adverse criticisms of it. We criticise to know 
and understand more exhaustively a piece of knowledge. But here, Krishna is advising  a technique of living which 
cannot fulfil itself in our lif e through mere criticism and 
questioning. Krishna is warning Arjuna that he will 
neither understand fully, not come to gain the blessings of 
that Way-of-Life, by deep st udy and noisy discussions. It 
can be understood and experienced ONLY by living it.  
THEY TOO ARE FREED FROM WORK --- Immature 
students of the Geeta have been  seen to cool down in their 
enthusiasm when they meet wi th the use of such terms. 
All through the chapter Kris hna was insisting that man 
should act --- act diligently and rightly. All of a sudden He 
points to a strange-look ing goal, WORKLESSNESS. 
Naturally, an intelligent reader immediately comes to feel 
a disgust at this ugly paradox. This is mainly because of 
our lack of appreciation of the term in its native Scriptural 
import.  
Earlier we have explained how the IGNORANCE of our 
Spiritual Nature gives rise to DESIRES, which in their turn 
cause THOUGHT-AGITATIONS, and also how WORK is 
nothing other than thoughts fulfilled among the sense-
objects. Thus, the "State of Workless-ness," is itself the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
235 
 "State of Thoughtless-ness," which indicates the 
"Condition of Desireless-ness. " Absence of all desires can 
come only when we rediscover the All-full Nature of the 
Self. In short, with the Kn owledge of the Self, when 
spiritual "ignorance" is term inated, desires can no more 
arise. Thus, the term "FREED FROM WORK" indicates the 
state beyond "ignorance," or the State of Self-hood.  
This Supreme State, no doubt, can never be reached 
purely through work. Parliament Street is not the 
Parliament; but having reached Parliament Street, the 
Parliament cannot be very far away; one cannot miss 
reaching the Parliament there. Similarly, Karma  Yoga  is 
extolled here as the "Path" that takes one ultimately to the 
Supreme, because through desireless activity one achieves 
Vasana -purgation, thus making the mind purer and 
subtler for meditative purposes.  
AS CONTRASTED WITH TH E ABOVE, SHRI KRISHNA 
EXPLAINS WHAT HAPPENS TO THOSE WHO CARP 
AT THIS THEORY OF RIGHT ACTION:  
  
32. But those who carp at My teaching and do not practice it, 
deluded in all knowledge, and de void of discrimination, know 
them to be doomed to destruction.  
"Those who decry this great teaching of Mine and do not 
practise it," Krishna warns His students, "will become 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
236 
 more and more deluded and will lose their 
discrimination."  
Man is encouraged to follow a life-of-action, only when he 
comes to appreciate that Way-of-Life completely in his 
understanding. When the very th eory is decried, it is no 
longer conducive to the intellect to accept it. Thus, decrying a philosophy is a sign of one's intellectual 
rejection of it. Having once rejected intellectually, there is 
no chance of an individual ever striving to live that 
philosophy. Karma  Yoga  is a way-of-life, and we have to 
live it if we want to come under its grace.  
The Path-of-Work lies through a process of elimination of 
the desires in us. When the eg o and ego-centric desires are 
eliminated, the work accomplished through such an 
individual is the true divine action, which is destined to 
having enduring achievements. To the extent man is NOT 
practising this efficient Way-of-Work, he would grow 
necessarily unintelligent, and to that extent, his 
discriminative capacity will deteriorate and ultimately get 
destroyed.  
The blessing, because of which man is considered superior 
to animals, is his divine fa culty of discrimination. An 
intellect, strengthened by it s own intrinsic capacity to 
distinguish between the Real and the unreal, the right and 
the wrong, is the mighty instrument of self-development 
in man. When this instrument is destroyed, man comes to 
behave in no better way than  a biped animal; panting on 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
237 
 the path of existence, bullied by its own lower instincts of 
miserable passions and low appetites. Naturally, he fails 
to make any true gain out of his life's chances, and finally 
destroys himself.  
THEN WHY DO NOT MEN FOLLOW THIS DOCTRINE 
AND PERFORM THEIR DUTIES FULLY? WHY SHOULD THEY FOLLOW OTHERS, OR ACT ON THEIR OWN? IN 
DISOBEYING KRISHNA, WHY ARE THEY NOT 
AFRAID OF TRANSGRESSING THE LORD'S 
COMMANDS? THE LORD SAYS:  
  
33. Even a wise man acts in acco rdance with his own nature; 
beings will follow their own nature; what can restraint do?  
Even the man-of-knowledge acts in conformity with his 
own nature, which is determ ined by the pattern of 
thoughts that arise in him. At any given instant of time, 
each one of us is determined by the thoughts that are in us 
at that moment; and the thoughts in us always get 
patternised by the channels of thinking, designed by the 
thoughts which we had entertai ned in the past. The nature 
of each individual is decided by the style of thinking 
which each is capable of.  
The man-of-knowledge mentioned here indicates one who 
has read and understood thoroughly the "technique of 
action" as explained in this chapter. Even when he knows 
the technique, the Lord says that it is not easy for him to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
238 
 follow it, because his mind is designed to carry his 
thoughts through ego-centric and selfish channels, ever 
panting to gain some desires. Because of these past 
impressions ( vasanas ), even an honest student finds it hard 
to practise this simple-lookin g technique in his life. The 
reason is quite universal: "BEINGS FOLLOW THEIR 
OWN NATURE." Naturally "WHAT CAN RESTRAINT 
DO" when nature is too powerful?  
This last statement in  the stanza "WHAT CAN 
RESTRAINT DO?" is not a cry of despair in Krishna's 
philosophy, but it is the hone st all-seeing vision of the 
philosopher in Krishna, who recognises that the higher 
ways of living are not meant fo r all. Men crowding on the 
lowest rung of the evolutionary ladder, overwhelmed by 
their own animal passions, find themselves incapable of 
renouncing them, and are, therefore, incapacitated to walk 
the Path-of-Action. It is only a slightly evolved entity, full 
of enthusiasm, activity and a passion for progress ( Rajo-
guna ), who can follow this sacred "path" and benefit 
himself. This honest confession shows the broad-
mindedness and tolerance of Krishna, the Universal 
Teacher.  
IF EVERY BEING ACTS ONLY ACCORDING TO HIS 
OWN NATURE --- AND THERE IS NONE THAT HAS NOT A NATURE OF HIS OW N --- THEN, THERE IS NO 
SCOPE FOR PERSONAL EXERTION AND THE 
TEACHING BECOMES PURPOSELESS. THE LORD 
EXPLAINS AS FOLLOWS:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
239 
   
34. Attachment and aversion for the objects of the senses abide 
in the senses; let none come under their sway; for they are his foes.  
In the last stanza, it is said that, even a man, well-read in 
the Shastras , cannot easily follow the highly ethical life 
which is demanded of a spirit ual seeker, because his lower 
nature proves too strong for him. Prescribing a medicine 
which is not available, is not the art of healing. It is the 
philosopher's duty, not only to indicate the weaknesses in 
our present life and the State-of-Perfection, but he must 
also show us ways and means by which we can transport 
ourselves from our weaknesses into this ideal State-of-
Perfection. Then, and then alone, can the philosopher 
bless his generation.  
Krishna indicates here the great robber in the 'within' of 
man, which loots away the true joys and thrills of 'right 
living.' Attachments and aversi ons of the sense-organs for 
their respective sense-objects are instictive, and natural, in 
every one. The sense-objects by themselves are incapable 
of bringing any wave of sorrow or agitation into the 
'within.' We get agitated and disturbed not at our sense-
organs, but in our mind. The mind gets disturbed because, 
when the stimuli reach the mind, it accepts, in its inherent 
mischief, certain types of stimuli as GOOD, and their 
opposites as BAD. Thereafter, it gets attached to the 
stimuli it experiences as good and develops an aversion 
for the opposite type of stimu li. Now the mind is prepared 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
240 
 to suffer the agonies of existence in the sorrowful 
plurality. Whenever it comes in contact with the infinite 
number of objects outside, it pants to court the things of 
its own attachment and labours to run away from the 
things of its own aversion. This  excitement of the mind is 
truly 'its tragedy.'  
Having stated this Truth, Krishna advises all seekers:  
"LET NONE COME UNDER THEIR SWAY."  
The philosophy of Geeta does not suggest, even in its 
implications, any kind of running away from the world-
of-sense-objects. Krishna's creed is to live HERE and 
NOW, in the midst of situations in life, in this very world, 
and to experience them throug h our sacred vehicles of the 
body, mind, and intellect. The on ly insistence is that on all 
occasions, a wise man should be a master of the vehicles 
and not a helpless victim of  these matter-envelopments. 
And the secret of this mastery in  life is to live free from the 
tyrannies of attachments and aversions.  
In order to detach ourselve s from both our likes and 
dislikes, we have to get rid of our false ego-centric 
vanities. Likes and dislikes belong to the ego. Therefore, 
all ego-less acts, as we have explained earlier, accomplish 
a purgation of Vasanas . Vasanas  create the mind; where the 
mind is, there revels the ego. To the extent the Vasanas  
have been reduced, to that extent the mind has become 
non-existent. Where the mind has ended, there the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
241 
 reflection of the Consciousn ess called the "ego" has also 
ended.  
THE METHODS BY WHICH WE CAN BRING ABOUT 
THE VASANA -PURGATION ARE EXPLAINED IN THE 
FOLLOWING:  
  
35. Better is one's own 'duty' , th ough devoid of merit, than the 
'duty' of another well discharged. Better is death in one's own 'duty' ; the 'duty' of another is fraught with fear (is productive 
of positive danger) .  
The word Dharma  in Sanskrit is the most elusive word for 
translation into English. It is  used generally in more than 
one definite meaning. Terms like righteousness, good 
conduct, duty, noble quality, etc., are some of them. We 
have explained it earlier and found how Dharma  
essentially means "the Law of  being" of anything in the 
world.  
That which determines one man' s personality as distinctly 
different from another's, it is very well known, is the 
texture of the thoughts entertai ned by him. This texture of 
his thoughts is, again, in its turn, determined by the 
pattern of thinking ( vasanas ), which his mind has gained 
from its own past. These pre-determined 'channels-of-
thinking' created by one's own earlier ways of thinking are 
called the Vasanas . Thus Dharma  should be conceived here 
as the Vasanas  in our mind, for no other explanation will 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
242 
 be correct since the very di scussion now is upon mental 
control. The word "duty," used by us in our translation, is, 
in this special sense, to be understood as Vasanas ."  
Swadharma  AND Para dharma  --- Swadharma  is not the duty 
which accrues to an individu al because of his "caste," 
which is ever a sheer accident of birth. In its right import Swadharma  means the type of Vasanas  that one discovers in 
one's own mind. To act acco rding to one's own taste, 
inborn and natural, is the only  known method of living in 
peaceand joy, in success and satisfaction. To act against 
thegrain of one's own Vasanas  would be acting in terms of 
Para dharma  --- and that this is frau ght with danger is very 
well known.  
In the context of the Geeta, there is a direct message for 
Arjuna. Arjuna is born a prin ce, trained in the art of war 
and has exhibited in his life his insatiable thirst for 
heroism and adventure. Naturally, his Swadharma  is that 
of a prince and that can find  fulfilment only in dangerous 
actions and endless exertions. Perhaps, as it was evident 
in the first chapter, Prince Arjuna had gathered during his 
early education, that the life of renunciation and 
meditation --- the life of a Brahmin  --- was nobler than his 
own life. And therefore, he wanted to run away from the 
battle-field into the silent caves-of-meditation. In this stanza, Krishna reminds him that to act according to his 
own Vasanas , even imperfectly, is the right path for his 
development. It is dangerous to suppress his own 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
243 
 personality-expression and copy  the activities of someone 
else, even if he be living a nobler and diviner life.  
THOUGH THE SOURCE OF EVIL HAS BEEN POINTED 
OUT EARLIER (II-62 AND III-34) , YET WITH A VIEW TO 
ELICITING A CONCISE AND CLEAR STATEMENT OF 
WHAT WAS BUT DESULTORILY AND VAGUELY EXPRESSED ARJUNA ASKS:  
  
Arjuna said: 36. But, by what impelled does man commit sin, 
though against his wishes, O Varshneya, constrained, as it were, by force?  
Following the tradition of the scriptures, the disciple now 
asks a definite question upon the very theme of the discussion. The very question sh ows that Arjuna has, to a 
large extent, got out of the hasty conclusions which he 
exhibited until the beginning of the second chapter. He 
has become introspective, and therefore, conscious of 
certain forces working within  himself that were ruining 
and obstructing the play of his own higher impulses. The 
doubt is couched in such familiar words that it appears as 
though it is a doubt raised by some student of our own 
times.  
There is no living man who has not in himself a 
sufficiently clear concepti on of the good and the 
meritorious. Every one understands intellectually what is 
R I G H T ,  b u t  i t  i s  o n l y  w h e n  i t  c o m e s  t o  a c t i o n  t h a t  o n e  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
244 
 invariably gets tempted to do the WRONG. This 
paradoxical confusion, bet ween one's ideology and one's 
own actions, becomes quite a big problem to all those who 
try to introspect and review themselves.  
The Divine in us, with Its nobler aspirations, wants to 
fulfil Itself with Its higher impulses and subtler achievements, but the animal instinct in us tempts us 
away, and we walk the path of the baser joys of the flesh. 
This invariably happens even against our own wishes. 
Arjuna is enquiring of the Lo rd: "What is the exact nature 
of this SATAN-in-our-bosom which thus systematically 
loots away the good in us?"  
Varshneya  is the name of Lord Krishna, meaning: "One 
born in the family of the Vrishnis ."  
THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN. I SHALL TELL YOU WHO 
THAT ENEMY IS OF WHOM YOU ASK --- WHO IS THE SOURCE OF ALL EVIL":  
  
The Blessed Lord Said: 37. It is desire, it is anger born of the 
"active, " all-devouring, all-sinful ; know this as the foe here (in 
this world) .  
IT IS DESIRE, IT IS WRATH --- Desire is the inner SATAN 
in the individual's bosom. We have seen earlier that desire 
is nothing other than our own spiritual "ignorance," 
expressing itself in our inte llectual personality. This 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
245 
 statement in the stanza is not to be understood as 
enumerating two different things. "Desire" itself, under 
certain circumstances, gains expression as "anger." A 
constant agitation of the mind, expressing as an 
uncontrollable impatience to gain something, is called 
"desire." Desire is generally for something other than 
ourselves. In the clash of existence, beings and 
circumstances may come between ourselves and the 
"object of our desire," and in such cases, our "desire" --- 
impulses, striking at the obst acle, gain the ugly look of 
"wrath."  
Thus, whenever emotions for acquisition and possession 
of an object flow incessantly towards that object, the 
bundle of thoughts so flowin g is called "desire;" while the 
same emotions, when they ge t obstructed from reaching 
their desired objects, and get refracted at an intermediate 
obstacle, are called "anger." Th is "desire-anger-emotion" is 
the very SATAN in us that compels us to compromise 
with our own intellectually known Higher values of existence, and tempts us to perpetrate sins. Greater the 
desire, greater the power in the pull towards the sinful 
and the low. Once desire has co me to manifest itself in our 
intellect, it enshrouds the wisdom in us.  
Desire and anger, and their numberless children of sin 
and sorrow, must ever come to breed upon the marshy 
lands of our deluded intellect. To come under their sway 
is "ignorance." To come to rule over them is "Wisdom."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
246 
 THE LORD NOW ILLUSTRATES HOW DESIRE IS OUR 
FOE AND HOW IT VEILS OUR DISCRIMINATION:  
  
38. As fire is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by dust, as an 
embryo by the womb, so this (w isdom) is enveloped by that 
(desire or anger) .  
Three different examples have been given to illustrate 
how desires and the consequent anger delude our rational capacity and choke our discrimin ation. Repetition is an 
unpardonable crime against the "scriptural-style," and the 
Geeta faithfully follows the immortal style common to all 
Bibles of the world. There is  no redundancy, or wasteful 
repetition in the Divine Song . With this understanding, 
when we try to readthe stan za we find that there are 
subtle implications in the th ree different illustrations used 
by the Lord. More is meant here than meets the eye.  
The discrimination in man is screened off and obstructed 
in its exercise due to the a ttachment in his mind for the 
ever-changing worldly-object s. We all know that our 
attachments to things can fall under three distinct 
categories. Our desires can either be low and vicious --- 
mind for the flesh-fleshy c arnal pleasures --- or our 
ambitions may be for an active exertion in order to achieve 
power and wealth, to gain st rength and might, to win 
fame and glory. There can also be a burning aspiration to 
strive and to achieve a diviner perfection and a Godly 
Self-illumination. Thus, our desires can fall under three 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
247 
 headings according to the qu ality of the attachment --- 
inert ( Tamasic ) ,  o r  a c t i v e  ( Rajasic ), or noble and divine 
(Sattwic ). The veilings that are created over our 
discrimination by these different types of qualities ( gunas ) 
are indicated here by the three different examples.  
AS FIRE BY SMOKE --- A smo ky fire-place, shrouded by 
dark curling smoke can sometimes, if not totally, at least 
partially, veil the brilliance of the light emitted by the 
flames. A wick without a chimne y is less bright than with 
a chimney, proving the example under review. Even 
Sattwic  desires veil the infinite glory of the Spirit.  
AS DUST ON A MIRROR --- This illustrates the veiling 
caused by agitations that co ver the purer intellect due to 
our thick desires for glory and power ( Rajasic ). Compared 
with the former, this is indeed more complete, and the 
removal of it is, naturally, more difficult. The smoke rolls 
off even at a passing whiff of breeze, while the mirror 
cannot be cleaned even by a storm. It can be polished only 
by our own efforts at dusting it clean with the help of a 
clean, dry duster. Through the smoke, however thick it 
might be, the fire can be percei ved; through the dust, if it 
be thick, no reflection at all can be seen in the mirror --- if 
at all seen it will only be dim.  
AS THE FOETUS IN THE WOMB --- This is an illustration 
to show how completely the Diviner aspect in us is 
screened off by the low animal  appetites and the vulgar 
desires for the sensuous. The foetus is covered by the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
248 
 womb until it matures, and there is no method of 
observing it as long as it is in the womb. The veiling is 
complete, and it can drop off on ly after a definite period of 
time. Similarly, the desires fo r the flesh-fleshy enjoyments 
build, as it were, a womb around the discriminative 
power in us, and such low mental pre-occupations 
(Tamasic ) can drop off only after a longer period of 
evolutionary growth undergone by such a deluded mind-
and-intellect.  
In the true scriptural style, Krishna thus distinguishes 
between the different textures in the veils that come to 
cover the soul when the in dividual is entertaining 
d i f f e r e n t  t y p e s  o f  d e s i r e s .  I n  s h o r t ,  d e s i r e  i s  t h a t  w h i c h  
hides the Divine in us.  
IN THIS STANZA IT IS NOT CLEARLY STATED, 
WHICH COVERS WHAT; THE LITERAL 
TRANSLATION OF THE WORDS AS THEY STAND IN 
THIS COUPLET ONLY SAYS, "SO IS THIS COVERED BY 
IT." THE TWO PRONOUNS, 'IT' AND 'THIS,' ARE 
DEFINED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA AND 
THEREIN WE FIND AN EXPLANATION OF BOTH:  
  
39. Enveloped, O Son of Kunti, is  'wisdom' by this constant 
enemy of the wise in the form of 'd esire, ' which is difficult to be 
appeased, like fire.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
249 
 This stanza vividly explains  to us that discrimination 
(Jnana ) the capacity to distinguish the Real from the 
unreal, the permanent from the impermanent, the true 
from the false, which gives man his higher status in the 
scale of evolution --- is the divine faculty that gets 
screened off from us due to our own greedy and insatiable 
desires. The pronouns in th e previous stanza now stand 
clearly elucidated: the "discrimin ative capacity" in us (it --- 
idam ) gets screened off by the insatiable "desires" (by this -
-- tena).  
HE NOW TELLS US WHICH ARE THE SEATS OF 
'DESIRE,' WHICH, BY ENVELOPING WISDOM, FORMS 
THE ENEMY OF THE WHOLE WORLD. THE SEAT OF 
THE ENEMY BEING KNOWN, IT IS EASY TO KILL IT:  
  
40. The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be its seat; 
through these, it deludes the em bodied by veiling his wisdom.  
As a true soldier, Arjuna un derstands that there is an 
inner enemy called "desire," which, like an efficient 
saboteur, undermines the wealth and security of his inner 
kingdom; and as a true prince, the royal demand of 
Arjuna is for immediate inform ation as to the exact hide-
out of this dangerous bandit. Krishna, as the spiritual 
teacher, has to indicate to his adventurous student where 
exactly the den of this devil is, from where he plans his nefarious activities. Indicating the secret fortresses of this 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
250 
 inner enemy "desire," the Lord says, "the senses, the mind, 
and the intellect are said to be its  
seats of action."  
A true criminal, functioning as an efficient leader of a 
gang, operating in a large area, will generally have more 
places than one to function from. Three main offices, from 
where "desire," in different fo rms, functions to destroy the 
peace and health of our inner life, have been indicated 
here very clearly.  
The sense-organs, functioning  without restraint in the 
world of sense-objects, are a very convenient theatre for 
"desire" to function in. When the external stimuli reach the 
mind through the sense-organs, the mind also becomes a 
breeding centre of sorrows created by "desire." Lastly, the 
intellect, working and playing with the memories of the 
sense-enjoyments it had lived, and of the mental attachments it had entertaine d, becomes yet another safe 
den for "desire" to function from.  
The deluded ego, foolishly identifying with the body, 
desires sense-enjoyments. Thou ghtlessly identifying with 
the mind, it thirsts to ex perience more and more 
emotional satisfactions. And lastly, identifying with the 
intellect, it plans to re-live the remembered experiences of 
sense-enjoyments and mental-joys.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
251 
 TO HUNT FOR "DESIRE" IN THESE THREE HIDE-OUTS 
IS TO COME, AT LAST, FACE  TO FACE WITH IT. HOW 
FINALLY TO OVERCOME THIS INNER ENEMY IS 
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:  
  
41. Therefore, O best of the Bh aratas, controlling first the 
senses, kill this sinful thing, the destroyer of knowledge and wisdom.  
As indicated earlier, Krishna declares a truth only when 
he has exhausted all the logical arguments leading to it. After giving all the arguments, he summarises here: 
"therefore, restrain the senses first," so that you may 
finally throw overboard the inner enemy "desire."  
"Desire" is called sinful, since, in its grosser 
manifestations, it tends to  make us live and work 
satisfying our lower nature, and thus persuades us to live 
a lower devolutionary life. Even at its best ( Sattwic ), like 
"the smoke that covers the fire," "desire" does not allow 
the full dawn of the Infinite, which is the Self in us. Thus, 
"desire," in all its textures, contributes to the sins of man, 
and, therefore, it is styled here as "THE SINFUL THING."  
It is easy for a doctor to prescribe a medicine for my 
wound and promise me an immediate healing. It is indeed 
consoling to have the prescription in my hand. But, I am 
sure, I will never gain a cure if the prescription requires 
me to prepare an ointment out of "sky-flowers." Similarly, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
252 
 it is quite a dignified advice for a spiritual Master to 
declare, "control the senses and cast off the 'desires,' O 
man!" --- But, unless the teacher gives us a method by 
which we can get this prescription dispensed, it will be as 
useless as the "sky-flower-treatment" for my painful 
wound.  
WHERE SHOULD ONE TAKE ONE'S STAND, AND 
CAST OFF THE DESIRES?"... THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:  
  
42. They say that the senses are su perior (to the bo dy) ; superior 
to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect; 
one who is even superior to  the intellect is He, (the Atman ) .  
This and the following stanza with which Vyasa 
concludes the third chapter of his incomparable Geeta, give every seeker a perfect technique by which he can 
bring about a successful huntin g and capture of his inner 
enemy, "desire."  
Although we cannot expect in the Bhagawad Geeta --- 
especially in one of the ve ry opening chapters --- an 
exhaustive treatment of the technique of meditation, yet 
we find that, in these stanzas, the Lord has etched out a 
complete outline of the "Sch eme-for-Self-discovery."  
Compared with the objects of  the world, we can easily 
understand that the sense-organs are more sacred and 
divine. Of the instruments that constitute our physical 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
253 
 structure, certainly the sense- organs are subtler than the 
organs-of-action. Everyone of us can easily experience that 
our mind controls and orde rs our sense-organs, and, 
therefore, we know that the mind is subtler than the 
Indriyas .  
No doubt, the mind has a vast kingdom to roam about in, 
but, even so, it has its own limitations and fixed frontiers. 
From knowledge to knowledge we extend the frontiers of 
our mind and all along this  aggressive march of new 
conquests it is the intellect that first crosses the existing 
frontiers of the mind, and wins for it the neighbouring 
kingdoms of "fresh knowledge." In this sense, the intellect 
has a greater pervasiveness than  the mind, and, therefore, 
it is conceived of as being subtler than the mind. That 
which lies beyond the intellect  is called the Supreme, the 
Atman .  
The Consciousness in man which lights up the very 
intellectual ideas in him must necessarily be subtler than 
the intellect itself. In the Upanishads  it has been finally 
declared that there is nothing subtler than the Self, the 
Atman . The technique of meditati on lies in the conscious 
withdrawal of all our identifications with our body, mind 
and intellect. All efforts end when we have thus gathered 
our entire awareness from its delusory pre-occupations and made it live in Itself as Itself --- as Objectless 
Awareness.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
254 
 THE GOAL GAINED BY PURSUING THIS ART OF 
MEDITATION IS EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING:  
  
43. Thus knowing Him, who is superior to intellect, and 
restraining the self by the Self, slay you, O mighty-armed, the 
enemy in the form of 'desire, ' no doubt hard indeed to conquer.  
With this stanza, not only does the chapter conclude, but, 
the special advice demanded by Arjuna has also been 
finally given. Through 'knowledge' alone is 
'ignorance'ended; through a lived experience of the Self 
alone can we end our 'ignorance -of-the-Self.' This spiritual 
'ignorance,' we have already fo und, creates 'desires.' The 
Lord has indicated earlier that 'desire' functions and 
thrives in the fields of the sense-organs, the mind, and the 
intellect. Through the proce sses of meditation, when we 
withdraw from our false identifications with the objects, 
the body and the mind, the 'desire'-faculty, that was till 
now roaming about and functioni ng in the outer fields, is 
gathered and established in the intellect.  
As long as we maintain in ourselves the limiting adjuncts 
of the matter-envelopments, so long we cannot realise our 
divine potentialities, but instead, in our delusion, we will understand ourselves to be nothing more than the little 
ego --- limited, bound, finite and ever-sobbing. After the 
re-discovery of our own divi ner existence we will be able 
to live "restraining the self by the Self." In a perfect 
Buddha's life, his ego functions completely under the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
255 
 control of the diviner in him. No more then can the 
'desire'-impulses, if at all they  arise in the mind, play their 
mischiefs and bring about any devastations in his inner 
life.  
It is very interesting to note  that the philosophy of the 
Geeta preaches a constructive re-organisation of life and not the destruction or rejection of life's possibilities. 
"Desire," being a painful leprous oozing wound, we are 
lovingly advised about the balm to cure the malady, and 
to live thereafter, in all efficiency, as a Master of 
circumstances and a Lord of our own emotions. A seeker 
who has accomplished this in himself is called a God-man, 
a Sage, a Prophet!  
Thus in the  UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, in 
the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of  YOGA , in the 
dialogue between Sri Krishna an d Arjuna, the third discourse 
ends entitled:  THE KARMA YOGA 
This chapter is called Karma  Yoga . The term Yoga  means 
the act of connecting the lower  with the higher, through a 
technique consisting of on e's own self-evolution. Any 
method by which the lower in us is educated and trained 
to live a Higher way-of-life --- wherein we gain a more 
effective control upon both ou r life without and life within 
--- is called Yoga .  
Here is a method of self-dev elopment pointed out to the 
Arjuna-type of men, who, fully  armed and standing on the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
256 
 battle-field of life, facing an array of opposing forces, more 
powerful, better organised, and well-supplied with 
equipments, are ready to fight and destroy them. In fact 
every honest man in life is to a large extent --- be he a fool, 
be he a saint --- an Arjuna facing his problems with 
hesitations... wanting to run aw ay, and yet, not daring to 
do so! The training of Karma  Yoga  prepares us for the 
greater fights on life's battle-fields.  
Om Om Om Om Om  
  
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
Jnana Karma Sanyasa Yoga 
 
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action with 
Knowledge 
 
 
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I taught this Imperishable YOGA to 
Vivasvan; Vivasvan taught it to Manu; Manu taught it to 
Ikshvaku.  
